---
post_title: A Reusable File System Event Watcher for PowerShell
username: msn
categories: PowerShell
tags: PowerShell, FileSystemWatcher, Module
featured_image: 
summary: FSWatcherEngineEvent module provides events of file system changes as powershell engine event
---

# A Reusable File System Event Watcher for PowerShell

Some time ago I wanted to sync files from a source directory to a destination directory immediately after they had changed in the source directory.
As a C# developer I'm aware of a .Net Framework class named '[FileSystemWatcher](/dotnetapi/system.io.filesystemwatcher)' which suits this job perfectly.
A file system watcher listens to change notifications generated by the operating system and invokes a given function if the file change matches several filter criteria like the directory, the file name or the type of the change.
There are already many examples on the internet showing how to create and configure the watcher in PowerShell but this isn't something I can easily recall from memory at the moment I need it.
I made the FSWatcherEngineEvent PowerShell module to make these file system watchers easier to use.
It hides the C#-API behind a PowerShell command with argument completion, it keeps track of the created watchers, and provides commands to pause notifications and to clean up the watchers if they are no longer needed.

After you install and import the module, you can create a new filesystem watcher.
As an example, you can watch for changes in directory 'C:\Temp\files'.
The command allows to specify the same parameters (with the same names) as if you are using the C# class directly.
This includes:

- NotifyFilter: what kind of change triggers an event (by default: LastWrite, FileName, DirectoryName)
- Filter: a wildcard to define a subset of files to watch
- IncludeSubdirectory: extends the area of observation to the subdirectories of the specified path

Please refer to the Microsofts reference documentation of the FileSystemWatcher class for the details.

```powershell
New-FileSystemWatcher -SourceIdentifier "MyEvent" -Path C:\Temp\files
```

The watcher now sends notifications to PowerShells engine event queue using the source identifier "MyEvent".
You can consume the event by registering an event handler for the same source identifier.
The following example just writes the whole event converted to JSON to the console:

```powershell-console
PS> Register-EngineEvent -SourceIdentifier "MyEvent" -Action { $event | ConvertTo-Json | Write-Host }

Id     Name            PSJobTypeName   State         HasMoreData     Location             Command
--     ----            -------------   -----         -----------     --------             -------
1      MyEvent                         NotStarted    False                                $event|ConvertTo-Json|Wr…
```

PowerShell allows you to register more than one handler for a single source identifier but the FSWatcherEngineEvent module doesn't allow you to create more than one watcher using the same source identifier.

To produce a new event, just write some characters to a file in the watched directory:

```powershell-console
PS> "XYZ" >> C:\Temp\files\xyz

{
  "ComputerName": null,
  "RunspaceId": "b92c271b-c147-4bd6-97e4-ffc2308a1fcc",
  "EventIdentifier": 4,
  "Sender": {
    "NotifyFilter": 19,
    "Filters": [],
    "EnableRaisingEvents": true,
    "Filter": "*",
    "IncludeSubdirectories": false,
    "InternalBufferSize": 8192,
    "Path": "D:\\tmp\\files\\",
    "Site": null,
    "SynchronizingObject": null,
    "Container": null
  },
  "SourceEventArgs": null,
  "SourceArgs": null,
  "SourceIdentifier": "MyEvent",
  "TimeGenerated": "2021-03-13T21:39:50.4483088+01:00",
  "MessageData": {
    "ChangeType": 4,
    "FullPath": "C:\\temp\\files\\xyz",
    "Name": "xyz"
  }
}
```

Events raised before a handler is registered remain in the queue until you consume them using '[Get-Event](xref:Microsoft.PowerShell.Utility.Get-Event)'/'[Remove-Event](xref:Microsoft.PowerShell.Utility.Remove-Event)'.

To suspend the notification temporarily and to resume it later the following two commands can be used:

```powershell
Suspend-FileSystemWatcher -SourceIdentifier "MyEvent"

Resume-FileSystemWatcher -SourceIdentifier "MyEvent"
```

To keep track of all the filesystem watchers created in the current Powershell process, you can use the command 'Get-FileSystemWatcher':

```powershell-console
PS>  Get-FileSystemWatcher

SourceIdentifier      : MyEvent
Path                  : C:\Temp\files\
NotifyFilter          : FileName, DirectoryName, LastWrite
EnableRaisingEvents   : True
IncludeSubdirectories : False
Filter                : *
```

This command writes a state object to the pipe containing the configuration of all filesystem watchers.
Finally, if you want get rid of filesystem watchers the command 'Remove-FileSystemWatcher' disposes a filesystem watcher specified by the source identifier or by piping in a collection of watchers:

```powershell
# to dispose one watcher
Remove-FileSystemWatcher -SourceIdentifier "MyEvent"

# to dispose all 
Get-FileSystemWatcher | Remove-FileSystemWatcher
```

Piping the filesystem watchers also works with the other commands.
If you like the module and want to see more you may inspect or fork its code at [github](https://github.com/wgross/fswatcher-engine-event).
